               Mars Mosaicked Digital Image Model (MDIM)

                    and Digital Terrain Model (DTM)
















               Eric Eliason, Raymond Batson, Sherman Wu
                        Branch of Astrogeology
                    United States Geological Survey
                        2255 North Gemini Drive
                       Flagstaff, Arizona 86001










                           November 1, 1992
                              Version 2.0




                               CONTENTS


1    -    INTRODUCTION 

2    -    VIKING MISSION 

3    -    VIKING ORBITER VISUAL IMAGING SUBSYSTEM 

4    -    CARTOGRAPHY AND DATA PRODUCTS 
          
5    -    DATA PREPARATION: PLANETARY DIGITAL MODELS 
 5.1 -    PROJECTIONS
 5.2 -    PIXEL SIZES

6    -    COMPILATION
 6.1 -    DTM
 6.2      MDIM 

7    -    CONCEPT OF TILING SCHEME

8    -    FILES, DIRECTORIES, AND DISK CONTENTS
 8.1 -    IMAGE FILE NAMING CONVENTION
 8.2 -    DIRECTORIES

9    -    IMAGE FILE ORGANIZATION
 9.1 -    IMAGE LABEL AREA
 9.2 -    IMAGE HISTOGRAM OBJECT
 9.3 -    IMAGE OBJECT

10   -    SOFTWARE 
 10.1-    SOFTWARE DISCLAIMER
 10.2-    SOFTWARE TOOLS

11   -    IMAGE INDEX

12   -    GAZETTEER 

13   -    VIKING VIEWING GEOMETRY (SPICE)

14   -    ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

15   -    REFERENCES

APPENDIX A -  ISO VOLUME AND DIRECTORY STANDARD 

APPENDIX B -  SYNTACTIC RULES OF KEYWORD ASSIGNMENT STATEMENTS 

APPENDIX C -  KEYWORD ASSIGNMENTS FOR MDIM AND DTM IMAGES 

APPENDIX D -  GEOMETRIC DEFINITION OF A PIXEL

APPENDIX E -  SINUSODIAL EQUAL-AREA PROJECTION EQUATION




1 -  INTRODUCTION


This digital image map of Mars is a cartographic extension of a
previously released set of CDROM volumes containing individual Viking
Orbiter Images  (PDS volumes VO_1001, VO_1002, etc.).  The data in the
latter are pristine, in the sense that they were processed only to the
extent required to view them as images.  They contain the artifacts and
the radiometric, geometric, and photometric characteristics of the raw
data transmitted by the spacecraft.  This new volume set, on the other
hand, contains cartographic compilations made by processing the raw
images to reduce radiometric and geometric distortions and to form
geodetically controlled Mosaicked Digital Image Models (MDIMs).  
(Because the photometric processing used in this MDIM was
oversimplified, quantitative radiometric analysis on this data is not
possible.) It also contains digitized versions of an airbrushed map of
Mars as well as a listing of all IAU-approved feature names.  In
addition, special geodetic and photogrammetric processing has been
performed to derive rasters of topographic data, or Digital Terrain
Models (DTMs).  The latter has a format similar to that of the MDIM,
except that elevation values are used in the array instead of image
brightness values.  The Mars DTM exists in its entirety on Volume 7.
Finally, Volume 7 has a listing of SPICE files derived for the Viking
images used in the MDIM and the DTM.  These files contain updated camera
orientation matrices for each of the frames.  The matrices are by-
products of the photogrammetric processing for the control network
required to compile the MDIM and the DTM.

The CDROM collection serves two purposes. First, the MDIM and DTM
collection serves as a data base for interactive map browser
applications. Secondly, the CDROM volume set provides a dense delivery
medium to build higher-derived cartographic image and topographic data
products such as special map series and planning charts for the Mars
Observer Project.

This set contains seven volumes with the following contents:

Volume 1.  Vastitas Borealis Region of Mars (VO_2001): MDIMs in 373 
     image files covering the entire north polar region of  Mars
     southward from the pole to a latitude of 42.5 deg North. Polar
     Stereographic projection images of the north pole area from 80
     to 90 degrees are located in the POLAR directory on this disk

Volume 2.  Xanthe Terra Region of Mars (VO_2002):  MDIMs in 412
     image files covering the region of Mars from 47.5 deg North
     latitude to 47.5 deg South latitude, and 0 deg longitude to 90
     deg West longitude.  

Volume 3.  Amazonis Planitia Region of Mars (VO_2003):  MDIMs in
     412 image files covering the region of Mars from 47.5 deg 
     North latitude to 47.5 deg South latitude, and 90 deg  West
     longitude to 180 deg West longitude.  
                                      
Volume 4.  Elysium Planitia Region of Mars (VO_2004):  MDIMs in 412 
     image files covering the region of Mars from 47.5  deg North
     latitude to 47.5 deg South latitude, and 180 deg West
     longitude to 270 deg West longitude.  

Volume 5.  Arabia Terra Region of Mars (VO_2005):  MDIMs in 412
     image files covering the region of Mars from 47.5 deg North
     latitude to 47.5 deg South latitude, and 270 deg West 
     longitude to 0 deg West longitude.  

Volume 6.  Planum Australe Region of Mars (VO_2006): MDIMs in 373 
     image files covering the entire South polar region of Mars
     northward from the pole to a latitude of 42.5 South latitude.
     Polar Stereographic projection images of the south pole area
     from 80 to 90 degrees are located in the POLAR directory on
     this disk
 
Volume 7.  Digital Topographic Map of Mars (VO_2007):  DTMs of the
     entire planet at  1/64, 1/16, and 1/4 deg/pixel; MDIMs of the
     entire planet at 1/64 and 1/16 deg/pixel; the digitized
     airbrush map of Mars at 1/16  and 1/4 deg/pixel; and revised
     SPICE files for all frames used to compile the MDIM and the
     DTM.

Each of the first six volumes contains MDIMs of the areas specified at
resolutions of 1/256 deg/pixel (231m) and at 1/64 deg/pixel (943m). 
Volumes 1, 6, and 7 also contain MDIM coverage of the entire planet at
1/16 deg/pixel (3.69 km). The seven volumes also include a digitized
airbrush map of the entire planet at 1/16 deg/pixel (3.69 km) and at 1/4
deg/pixel. The Sinusoidal Equal-Area Projection is used for all MDIM and
DTM files in this collection.  Appendix E of this document contains a
detailed description of the Sinusoidal projection and use of the
cartographic keywords found in the image labels.
 
The tiling layout of the 1/64 deg/pixel digital models is the same on
the first six volumes, but has been modified on Volume 7. The Volume 7
1/64 deg/pixel tile scheme was modified so that each tile would contain
approximately 1000 lines and 1000 samples. The 1/64 and 1/16 deg/pixel
MDIM, segments of which appear in Volumes 1 through 6, is duplicated in
its entirety on Volume 7.   All of the resolution compressions were done
by averaging, not by subsampling. A gazetteer of IAU-approved feature
names, referenced by latitude/longitude coordinates is included as a
table file on each of the seven volumes.


 
2 - VIKING MISSION

The Viking Mission consisted of four spacecraft:  two identical orbiters
and two identical landers.  During cruise from Earth to Mars the landers
were attached to the orbiters.  Thirteen science teams had experiments
on these spacecraft.  The major scientific objective of the mission was
to search for life on Mars.  Several experiments on the landers were
designed to address this objective.  In addition, some of the
experiments on the orbiters and landers focused on the study of the
composition and physical properties of the atmosphere, the distribution
of water vapor, and global and local meteorology.  Other experiments
investigated the composition and physical properties of the surface and
the geologic history of Mars.  Data on the seismicity of Mars and its
gravity field were also acquired to study the internal structure of Mars
[1, 2].

One of the Orbiter experiments was the Visual Imaging Subsystem (VIS),
which acquired the images that comprise the Mars MDIM.  Stereo imaging
for the obiter cameras were used to photogrammetrically derive the DTM.
The imaging system is briefly described in the next section.  The first
objective of the VIS experiment was to characterize potential landing
sites in support of site selection.  Additional objectives were to study
the photometric and colorimetric properties of the surface, to study
various geological features that were discovered by Mariner 9 in order
to better understand the geological history of Mars, to study the
dynamics of the atmosphere, and to monitor the surface for changes.

The Viking Orbiter spacecraft operated in orbit around Mars from 1976
until 1980.  The overall Viking mission was divided into a number of
mission phases with specific objectives.  The "primary mission" extended
from orbital insertion in June 1974 until November 1976.  The main
objective of the primary mission was to collect data in support of
landing site selection.  The spacecraft orbital characteristics were
chosen so that the Orbiters could serve as relay stations for
communications between the Landers and Earth.  In addition, the Orbiter
imaging systems imaged all of the terrains on Mars, collected some color
and stereo images, and made observations of Phobos and Deimos.  The
"extended mission" took place between November 1976 and May 1978, and
the "continuation mission" took place from May 1978 through February
1979.  During these periods the Orbiters were not always required as
relay stations with the Landers, and could be used for data gathering
that was independent of the Lander missions.  Some of the image
sequences acquired by the VIS experiment include systematic medium and
high resolution coverage of large portions of the surface, stereo
images, observations of Phobos and Deimos, color images of the
equatorial regions, observations of the polar regions, and monitoring
dust storm activity.  The final phase of the Viking Mission was the
"survey mission" from July 1979 until July 1980.  During the Survey
Mission only Viking Orbiter 1 operated since Viking Orbiter 2 had lost
its attitude control gas through a series of leaks.  The survey mission
was designed to obtain contiguous high resolution coverage of the
Martian cratered terrain.  One reason for acquiring these data was to
help select landing sites on Mars for future missions.



3 - VIKING ORBITER VISUAL IMAGING SUBSYSTEM


Each Viking Orbiter was equipped with two identical vidicon cameras,
called the Visual Imaging Subsystem (VIS) [3, 4, 5].  Each VIS camera
consisted of a telescope, a slow scan vidicon, a filter wheel, and
associated electronics.  The angular field of view of the camera as
defined by the reseau pattern was 1.51 by 1.69 degrees.  The ground area
covered by an image varies as a function of spacecraft altitude and
emission angle.  A digital image was generated by scanning the vidicon
face plate.  The signal at each location (pixel) was digitized as a
7-bit number (i.e., within the range of 0 to 127).  The EDR image data
were converted to 8-bit numbers by multiplying the original 7-bit
numbers by 2.  Thus, the least significant bit of each pixel in an EDR
image is zero, except for interpolated pixels or pixels with corrupted
values.  A full-resolution, Viking Orbiter image consists of an array of
1056 lines with 1204 samples per line.  There are only 1182 valid
samples in each line.  The extra 22 samples in each line consist of dark
bands on the left and right edges of each image, produced by an opaque
mask located at the front of the vidicon.  Each dark band is
approximately 11 samples wide, although the exact width varies from
image to image.

Each VIS camera contained a filter wheel with five color filters (blue,
minus blue, violet, green, and red) and a clear position, i.e., no
filter.  The filter half power bandwidths are approximately:  blue from
0.35 to 0.53 micrometers; minus-blue from 0.48 to 0.70 micrometers;
violet from 0.35 to 0.47 micrometers; clear from 0.35 to 0.70
micrometers; green from 0.50 to 0.60 micrometers; and red from 0.55 to
0.70 micrometers.  Multiple images of the same areas were occasionally
acquired using violet, green, and red filters to form color images after
processing on Earth.  Color image reconstruction from Viking imaging
requires radiometric and geometric corrections, and co-registration of
the images that make up the color set.  


 
4 - CARTOGRAPHY AND DATA PRODUCTS

The DTM was compiled by methods of stereoscopic photogrammetry described
by Wu et al. [6, 7]. The topographic compilations were tied to a refined
topographic control net for Mars [8] with a published standard error of
about 5 km horizontally and 1000m to 1500m vertically. 

The global MDIM of Viking Orbiter images of Mars was compiled according
to the plan described by Batson [9, 10, 11, 12].  Most of the images in
the published 1:2,000,000-scale controlled photomosaic map series
published by USGS were used in the MDIM, but with improved  radiometric
and geometric enhancements. 
  
The DTM and the MDIM are tied to the same topographic control net.  The
5km standard error represents 20 pixels at 1/256 deg/pixel in the MDIM.
Discrepancies between adjacent frames are far less than 20 pixels over
most, but not all, of the planet.  We attempted to distribute the error
so that it was not obtrusive in the mosaics, but this was not possible
in some areas.  The error can be attributed to a lack of precise
knowledge of the spacecraft location at the time each image was taken
and to parallax in oblique images of rugged terrain.  Camera locations
can be derived only by tracking the spacecraft continuously and
precisely during its active lifetime, which was not always done for
Viking Orbiters 1 and 2.  Given assumed camera positions, camera
orientations were derived by reducing to their minima the discrepancies
between images in overlapping frames and the control net.


5 -  DATA PREPARATION:  PLANETARY DIGITAL MODELS

Digital mosaics have in the past been compiled primarily as elegant
demonstrations of a costly alternative to manual compilations.  They
have generally been special products designed to serve specialized
purposes and until recently were not affordable as primary standard
products.  The intent of the digital planetary mapping program is to
develop a unified system, consisting of a single digital format for all
planetary  cartographic databases.  The relations between digital
map-storage formats and map projection and image resolution are
therefore fundamental considerations in the design of the system. 

5.1 - PROJECTIONS

The simplest form of a digital model (DM) is one in which each image
element's value is stored in a "bin" (pixel) labeled in terms of
latitude and longitude.  For computer work, it is only necessary that
each bin be readily accessible.  In compiling and describing DM's,
however, it is useful to discuss a digital array in terms of map
projections.  The simplest projection is one in which each image line,
or row of bins, is a parallel of latitude and each column of samples, or
bins, is a meridian. This presentation was termed a "Simple Cylindrical"
or "Square" projection by Clark [13].  Its simplicity is appealing, even
though the higher latitudes are oversampled (e.g., the pole of a planet,
in reality, is a point, but is represented digitally by an image line
with as many samples as that for the equator, all with the same value). 
Several planetary consortia, consisting of geological, geochemical, and
geophysical databases in this format, have used this format for several
years for the Moon, Mars, Venus, and the Galilean satellites [14, 15
16]. The total storage required for this kind of array is only about
60% more than if each element represented the same size area on the
planet, and is therefore not prohibitive.  However, this projection does
present an operational problem, in that a Simple Cylindrical projection
of a single spacecraft image containing the north or south pole has too
many pixels in an image line to manage easily during DM compilation. As
a result, the Sinusoidal Equal-Area projection [17] was selected for
compiling planetary DM's.  The conversions between Simple Cylindrical
and Sinusoidal Equal-Area geometry are so computationally trivial that
the two formats are nearly twins.

A Sinusoidal Equal-Area projection is one in which each parallel of
latitude is an image line, and the length of each line is compressed by
the cosine of its latitude.  The Sinusoidal projection has the
simplicity of the Simple Cylindrical projection so far as indexing (rows
and columns are still parallels along meridians), but compilation is
much more efficient in the Sinusoidal Equal-Area because the projection
does not have mathematical peculiarities at the poles.  However, viewing
distortion becomes severe with distance from the central meridian in the
sinusoidal presentation.  This is a problem only for visual examination
of DIM images; it is not relevant to the integrity of the database.  By
simply sliding image lines parallel to one another, the central meridian
can be rapidly shifted; this allows an undistorted view of a selected
region without geometrically resampling the image. Segments of a DIM can
therefore be displayed with a local central meridian, although the poles
themselves must be transformed to a polar projection. 

The Sinusoidal projection and use of the cartographic keywords in the
image labels are described in Appendix E of this document.

5.2 - PIXEL SIZES

The resolution of digital images is often given in terms of pixel
dimensions in meters or kilometers on the surface of a target. However,
Mars DM's on this CDROM are encoded so that the number of lines (which
are also parallels of latitude) in a global DM is an integer.  It is
therefore more convenient to specify DM resolution in terms of
planetocentric degrees than in linear units.  The size of pixels in DM's
is therefore specified as some negative power of two (1/4, 1/8, 1/16 . .
. 1/256, etc.) degrees per pixel.  Resolutions intermediate to these
values are not used, so that databases can be registered in scale simply
by successively doubling or halving the pixel sizes by subsampling or
averaging, but without resampling.

Selected segments of DIMs may be written as photographic prints or
published as maps in the traditional format. Table 1 shows metric
equivalents of pixel sizes for each solar system body currently included
in NASA's mapping plans [17]. Table 1 shows equivalents of digital model
resolutions, in kilometers per pixel.  Mean radii are given for
non-spherical bodies.  


   TABLE 1. - METRIC EQUIVALENTS OF PIXEL SIZES FOR SOLAR SYSTEM BODIES
  --------------------------------------------------------------------
    |         |Radius|          Digital scale (deg/pixel)             |
    |Planet   | (km) |  1/16|  1/32|  1/64| 1/128| 1/256| 1/512|1/1024|
    |_________|______|______|______|______|______|______|______|______|
    |         |      |      |      |      |      |      |      |      |
    |Mercury  |  2439| 2.660| 1.330|  .665|  .333|      |      |      |
    |         |      |      |      |      |      |      |      |      |
    |Venus    |  6052| 6.602| 3.301| 1.650|  .825|  .413|  .206|  .103|
    |         |      |      |      |      |      |      |      |      |
    |Moon     |  1738| 1.896|  .948|  .474|  .237|  .118|  .059|      |
    |         |      |      |      |      |      |      |      |      |
    |Mars     |  3385| 3.692| 1.846|  .923|  .462|  .231|  .115|  .058|
    |Phobos   |    11|  .012|      |      |      |      |      |      |
    |Deimos   |     6|  .007|      |      |      |      |      |      |
    |         |      |      |      |      |      |      |      |      |
    |Io       |  1821| 1.986|  .993|  .497|  .248|  .124|  .062|      |
    |Europa   |  1565| 1.707|  .854|  .427|  .213|  .107|  .053|      |
    |Ganymede |  2634| 2.873| 1.437|  .718|  .359|  .180|  .090|      |
    |Callisto |  2403| 2.621| 1.311|  .655|  .328|  .164|  .082|      |
    |         |      |      |      |      |      |      |      |      |
    |Mimas    |   199|  .217|      |      |      |      |      |      |
    |Enceladus|   249|  .272|      |      |      |      |      |      |
    |Tethys   |   523|  .571|      |      |      |      |      |      |
    |Dione    |   560|  .611|      |      |      |      |      |      |
    |Rhea     |   764|  .833|  .417|      |      |      |      |      |
    |Iapetus  |   718|  .783|      |      |      |      |      |      |
    |         |      |      |      |      |      |      |      |      |
    |Miranda  |   236|  .257|      |      |      |      |      |      |
    |Ariel    |   579|  .632|      |      |      |      |      |      |
    |Umbriel  |   585|  .638|      |      |      |      |      |      |
    |Titania  |   789|  .861|      |      |      |      |      |      |
    |Oberon   |   761|  .830|      |      |      |      |      |      |
    |         |      |      |      |      |      |      |      |      |
    |Triton   |  1353| 1.476|  .738|  .369|  .184|  .092|      |      |
    |_________|______|______|______|______|______|______|______|______|


6 - COMPILATION

6.1 - DTM

The DTM was compiled by manually digitizing the contour lines on the
1:2,000,000-scale series of topographic maps published by the U.S.
Geological Survey.  The original contours were at one kilometer
intervals. When drawing the final contour lines the MDIM map series was
used as the base in order to insure proper registration of the DTM and
MDIM. In mose areas of the planet, the DTM and MDIM  co-register to
within one are two pixels. The digitized one kilometer contour-line
vector files were then gridded to form the DTM raster. The PICS system
[18] contour interpolation program program, called INTERP, was used to
grid the contour lines. In brief, this algorithm interpolates between
contour lines by using only the values of the two contour lines. The
program uses a distance weighting algorithm to form weighted averages
that produce the interpolated data.

The pixel values (DN values) in the DTM images have been offset and
scaled. In order to obtain the elevation from the DTM data, users should
apply the following equation to the DN values.

      ELEVATION(METERS) = DN*2.0 - 6000

The elevations are referenced to the topographic datum (zero-elevations
reference surface) as outlined by Wu [19]. The Mars Topographic datum is a
gravity-level surface described in terms of spherical harmonics of
fourth-degree and forth-order combined with a 6.1 millibar pressure
surface with a mean radius of 3382.9 km.

6.2 - MDIM

Compilation of the MDIM is described in the VOLINFO.TXT file on volumes
1 through 6 of this set.

When viewing low-contrast images on a display device, the image will
look very bland unless a contrast stretch is applied to the image
values. For convenience of image display applications, the MDIM files
have an object containing the image histogram in order to facilitate
the rapid display of an image with optimum contrast. An image display
application could extract the image histogram from the file, use it to
determine an optimum contrast stretch, and then load the display's DN
look-up table to perform the contrast stretch.

7 - CONCEPT OF THE TILING SCHEME

Most DMs are far too large to be managed conveniently as single files,
and must be segmented to produce tiles of manageable size for
convenient access on CD-ROM disks.  The scheme used for the 1/256
deg/pixel MDIM results in unnecessarily  small tiles for the 1/64
deg/pixel DTM.  A revised scheme utilizing 15 X 15 deg tiles in the
equatorial regions and modified for convergence of meridians in the
higher and lower latitudes was therefore implemented on Volume 7.

Just as published maps are indexed by the latitude/longitude of their
center points (truncated to the nearest integer degree to simplify the
indexing), the labels of the files in the MDIM refer to the
latitude/longitude of the center of the tile.  Thus, the tile (DTM
file) named TG15N007.IMG is centered on a point 15 deg. north of the
equator and a latitude of 7 deg. West.

Each tile has its own central meridian in order to minimize the
geometric distortion (shearing) of the data within the tile and can be
independently displayed with little geometric projection distortion. 
Thus, craters remain round rather than being oblong. With each tile
having its own central meridian, simple display software can display a
tile (or sub-area of a tile) with virtually no geometric distortion in
the area of interest. 

The central meridian of a Sinusoidal Equal-Area projection can be
changed by sliding image lines parallel to one another (assuming
nearest-neighbor interpolation).  For a computer algorithm to convert an
DM tile to a new central meridian, the algorithm need only calculate a
starting offset (where to put the first sample of the input line) and
simply move the pixels from the input buffer to the output buffer
starting at the calculated offset. For example, if a feature of interest
existed on a boundary between two tiles, it would be relatively simple
to develop a program that would read the two tiles into memory, create
an output memory array with a new central meridian equal to the boundary
longitude between the two tiles, and then copy the input tile lines to
the output tile lines with a calculated offset value for each line.

8 -  FILES, DIRECTORIES, AND DISK CONTENTS

8.1 - IMAGE FILE NAMING CONVENTION

Each image file has a unique name that is constructed according to the
type of image file, resolution, and its central latitude and longitude. 
Because only eight characters are available as a file name, a highly
compressed notation is used. The general form of an image file name is
'vwxxyzzz.IMG'.  In this construct the 'v' field represents the type of
image data in the file and it has three possible values: 'M' represents
a MDIM image, 'T' represents a DTM image, and 'S' represents a shaded
relief airbrush image. The 'w' field represents the resolution of the
image file. In this field an alphabetic character is used to represent
the scale: 'A' = 1/1 degrees/pixel, 'B' = 1/2, 'C' = 1/4, 'D' = 1/8,
'E' = 1/16, etc. For this volume set only the characters 'C' (1/4
degree/pixel), 'E' (1/16 degree/pixel), 'G' (1/64 degree/pixel), and
'I' (1/256 degree/pixel) are used. The 'xx' field is constructed from
the central latitude of the image file. The central latitude is rounded
down to the nearest whole integer of latitude. The 'y' field contains
the value of 'N' for north latitude files, and 'S' for south latitude
files.  Finally, the 'zzz' field is constructed from the central
longitude of the image file. The central longitude is rounded down to
the nearest whole integer of longitude.  The '.IMG' extension name is a
PDS standard indicating the file is an image file. MI00N090.IMG is an
example file name. It is an  MDIM image, has a resolution of 1/256
degree/pixel, a center latitude at the equator, and a center longitude
at 90 degrees. Table 2 summarizes the file naming convention for image
files.

             
                 TABLE 2. - IMAGE FILE NAME CONVENTION
                 -------------------------------------

           General Form of Image File Names -   vwxxyzzz.IMG
           where:

               v   =  Type of image file
                       M - Mars Digital Image Map
                       T - Mars Digital Topographic Model
                       S - Shaded Relief Airbrush Map
               w   =  Resolution code for image file
                       C  - 1/4   degrees/pixel
                       E  - 1/16  degrees/pixel
                       G  - 1/64  degrees/pixel
                       I  - 1/256 degrees/pixel
               xx  =  Central latitude value rounded
                      down to nearest whole latitude
               y   =  North or South latitude
                       N - North latitude
                       S - South latitude
               zzz =  Central longitude value rounded 
                      down to nearest whole longitude
              -------------------------------------------


8.2 - DIRECTORIES 

The volume and directory structure of this CD-ROM conforms to the
level-1 standard specified by the International Standards
Organization (ISO).  This standard is also known as the ISO-9660
standard.  The ISO standard was used so that the disks can be
accessed on a wide variety of computer systems.  Information on the
ISO-9660 CD-ROM standard is provided in Appendix A of this
document. 

The Image files are subdivided into directories based on the type
of image file (MDIM, DTM, shaded relief airbrush), the resolution
of the image file, and for 1/256 and 1/64 degree/pixel image files
the center latitude of the image.  For 1/4 and 1/16 degree/pixel
images the first two characters of a file name followed by six 'X'
characters make up the directory name. For example, all of the 1/16
degree/pixel MDIM images are located in the directory MEXXXXXX
(Volumes 1 and 6 only). For 1/256 and 1/64 degree/pixel images the
first five characters of a file name followed by three 'X'
characters make up the directory name. For example,  all of the
1/256 degree/pixel images with center latitude 45 degrees north are
located in the directory MI45NXXX. Volumes 1,6 and 7 contain a
special directory called POLAR which contains Polar Stereographic
projection images from 80 to 90 degrees latitude.


The MDIM images, Shaded relief airbrush images, DTM image files
(volume 7 only), supplemental files, documentation, and software
are located in separate directories. Table 3 shows the contents of
the 10 directories common to all seven volumes: 1) the root
directory is the primary directory on the disk; 2) the DOCUMENT
directory contains documentation files; 3) the GAZETTER directory
contains the gazetteer table and supplemental files; 4) the INDEX
directory contains the image index table; 5) the LABEL directory
contains ancillary PDS label files; 6) the SOFTWARE directory
contains supporting software for the MDIM image files; 7) the
SCXXXXXX directory contains the 1/4 degree resolution shaded relief
airbrush image; 8) the SEXXXXXX directory contains the shaded
relief airbrush map at 1/16 degree resolution; and 9) the MEXXXXXX
directory contains the 1/16 degree resolution MDIM images 

          TABLE 3. - DIRECTORY CONTENTS OF COMMON DIRECTORIES
          ---------------------------------------------------

        root  directory
           AAREADME.TXT - Introduction to this CDROM volume
           VOLDESC.SFD  - Volume descriptor label

        DOCUMENT directory
           VOLINFO.TXT      - Documentation for the MDIM volumes

        GAZETTER directory
           GAZETTER.TXT     - Gazetteer documentation
           GAZETTER.LBL     - PDS labels for the Gazetteer table
           GAZETTER.TAB     - Gazetteer table for Mars
           GAZINFO.TXT      - Information on Gazetter table
           GAZETTER.DBF     - DBASE structure file for Gazetteer table
           WPMACRO.TXT      - How do use the Word Perfect Macros
           *.WPM            - Word Perfect macros for conversion of
                              diacritical marks to Word Perfect format
        INDEX directory
           Directory contains index tables and PDS labeled files that
           describe the index.

        LABEL directory
           DSMAPDIM.LBL     - Ancillary label for the data set map
           DSMAPDTM.LBL       projection object.

        SOFTWARE directory  
           MAC subdirectory - Macintosh display software
           PC  subdirectory - IBM/PC display software
           SUN subdirectory - SUN Sparcstation display software
           VAX subdirectory - VAX/VMS Workstation display software

        SCXXXXXX directory
           SC00N000.IMG     - Shaded Relief Airbrush image file at 1/4
                              degrees per pixel containing 1440 
                              samples and 720 lines.
        SEXXXXXX directory
           *.IMG            - Shaded Relief Airbrush image files at 1/16

        MEXXXXXX directory
           *.IMG            - MDIM image files at 1/16 degrees per pixel

        TCXXXXXX directory (volume 7 only)
           TC00N000.IMG     - DTM image file at 1/4 degrees per pixel
                              containing 1400 samples and 720 lines.

        TEXXXXXX directory (volume 7 only)
           *.IMG            - DTM image files at 1/16 degrees per pixel

        POLAR directory (volumes 1, 6, and 7 only)
           *.IMG            - MDIM, DTM, and shaded relief Airbrush
                              image files of the polar regions in a
                              polar stereo graphic projection

9 - IMAGE FILE ORGANIZATION

The record structure of the MDIM, Shaded Relief Airbrush, and DTM image
files is a fixed-length format (see Appendix A for a description of
fixed-length record files). There are three areas that make up the
image file: the image label, the image histogram object, and the image
object.


9.1 - IMAGE LABEL AREA

The label area of a image file contains descriptive information about
the image. The label consists of keyword statements that conform to
version 2 of the Object Description Language (ODL) developed by NASA's
PDS project [20, 21].  There are three types of ODL statements within a
label: structural statements, keyword assignment statements, and
pointer statements.

Structural statements provide a shell around keyword assignment
statements to delineate which data object the assignment statements are
describing.  The structural statements are:

         1) OBJECT = object_name
         2) END_OBJECT
         3) END

The OBJECT statement begins the description of a particular data object
and the END_OBJECT statement signals the end of the object's
description.  All keyword assignment statements between an OBJECT and
its corresponding END_OBJECT statement describe the particular object
named in the OBJECT statement.  The END statement terminates a label. 

A keyword assignment statement contains the name of an attribute and
the value of that attribute.  Keyword assignment statements are
described in more detail in Appendix B of this document.  These
statements have the following format:

         name = value

Values of keyword assignment statements can be numeric values,
literals, and text strings.

Pointer statements are a special class of keyword assignment
statements.  These pointers are expressed in the ODL using the
following notation:

         ^object_name = location

If the object is in the same file as the label, the location of the
object is given as an integer representing the starting record number
of the object, measured from the beginning of the file.  The first
label record in a file is record 1.  Pointers are useful for describing
the location of individual components of a data object.  Pointer
statements are also used for pointing to data or label information
stored in separate files.  An example of a detached label (i.e., label
information stored in a separate file) is shown below: By convention,
detached labels are found in the LABEL directory.

         ^STRUCTURE = 'logical_file_name'

The value of 'logical_file_name' is the name of the detached label file
containing the description.

The keyword statements in the label are packed into the fixed-length
records that make up the keyword label area. Each keyword statement is
terminated by a carriage-return and line-feed character sequence. An
example of a MDIM image label is shown in table 4.  Descriptions of the
keywords used in the MDIM label are found in Appendix C.



                TABLE 4. - EXAMPLE OF MDIM IMAGE LABEL
                --------------------------------------

CCSD3ZF0000100000001NJPL3IF0PDS200000001 = SFDU_LABEL
/*          FILE FORMAT AND LENGTH */
RECORD_TYPE          = FIXED_LENGTH
RECORD_BYTES         = 1184
FILE_RECORDS         = 1283
LABEL_RECORDS        = 2
/*          POINTERS TO START RECORDS OF OBJECTS IN FILE */
^IMAGE_HISTOGRAM     = 3
^IMAGE               = 4
/*          IMAGE DESCRIPTION */
DATA_SET_ID          = "VO1/VO2-M-VIS-5-DIM-V1.0"
SPACECRAFT_NAME      = {VIKING_ORBITER_1, VIKING_ORBITER_2}
TARGET_NAME          = MARS
IMAGE_ID             = MI65N005
SOURCE_IMAGE_ID      = {"793A03", "823A12", "669B17", "672B32", 
    "672B55", "672B57", "672B58", "672B60", "672B61", "672B62", 
    "672B83"}
INSTRUMENT_NAME      = {VISUAL_IMAGING_SUBSYSTEM_CAMERA_A, 
                        VISUAL_IMAGING_SUBSYSTEM_CAMERA_B}
NOTE                 = "MARS DIGITAL IMAGE MAP, 1/256 DEG/PIXEL, 
    CENTER LAT,LON 65.00,    5.000    "
/*          DESCRIPTION OF OBJECTS CONTAINED IN FILE */
OBJECT                 = IMAGE_HISTOGRAM
  ITEMS                = 256
  ITEM_TYPE            = VAX_INTEGER
  ITEM_BITS            = 32
END_OBJECT             = IMAGE_HISTOGRAM
OBJECT                 = IMAGE
  LINES                = 1280
  LINE_SAMPLES         = 1184
  SAMPLE_TYPE          = UNSIGNED_INTEGER
  SAMPLE_BITS          = 8
  SAMPLE_BIT_MASK      = 2#11111111#
  CHECKSUM             = 123456789
END_OBJECT             = IMAGE
OBJECT                 = IMAGE_MAP_PROJECTION_CATALOG
  ^DATA_SET_MAP_PROJECTION_CATALOG = "DSMAPDIM.LBL"
  MAP_PROJECTION_TYPE  = SINUSOIDAL
  MAP_RESOLUTION       = 256<PIXEL/DEG>
  MAP_SCALE            = 0.231352<KM/PIXEL>
  MAXIMUM_LATITUDE     = 67.50000
  MINIMUM_LATITUDE     = 62.50000
  MAXIMUM_LONGITUDE    = 10.00000
  MINIMUM_LONGITUDE    = -0.01627
  X_AXIS_PROJECTION_OFFSET = -17280.000
  Y_AXIS_PROJECTION_OFFSET = -591.038
  A_AXIS_RADIUS        = 3393.40
  B_AXIS_RADIUS        = 3393.40
  C_AXIS_RADIUS        = 3375.73
  FIRST_STANDARD_PARALLEL = "N/A"
  SECOND_STANDARD_PARALLEL = "N/A"
  POSITIVE_LONGITUDE_DIRECTION = WEST
  CENTER_LATITUDE      = 0.00000
  CENTER_LONGITUDE     = 5.00000
  REFERENCE_LATITUDE   = "N/A"
  REFERENCE_LONGITUDE  = "N/A"
  X_AXIS_FIRST_PIXEL   = 1
  Y_AXIS_FIRST_PIXEL   = 1
  X_AXIS_LAST_PIXEL    = 1280
  Y_AXIS_LAST_PIXEL    = 1184
  MAP_PROJECTION_ROTATION = "N/A"
END_OBJECT             = IMAGE_MAP_PROJECTION_CATALOG
END



9.2 - IMAGE HISTOGRAM OBJECT

The first object after the label in an MDIM image file is the histogram
of the image.  DTM files do not contain a histogram object because the
pixel values are 16-bit signed integers. The Image Histogram Object
begins at the record specified by the ^IMAGE_HISTOGRAM pointer keyword.
(Note,  the first record in the file is defined as record 1.)  The
number of fixed-length records that make up the image histogram object
can be determined by subtracting the value of the ^IMAGE pointer
keyword from the ^IMAGE_HISTOGRAM pointer keyword value.  These
records, when concatenated together, contain the 256 elements of the
image histogram with each element occupying four bytes. Each element is
a 32-bit VAX integer [22]. The first element of the histogram contains
the count of pixels in the image with the brightness value 0. The last
element contains the count of pixels in the image with brightness value
255.

9.3 - IMAGE OBJECT

The second object in the MDIM image file contains the image data.
The image starts at the record specified by the ^IMAGE keyword. The
number of records that make up the image is specified by the LINES
keyword value. Each image line is stored in a separate fixed-length
record. Each sample is an 8-bit unsigned integer as described by
the SAMPLE_BITS and the SAMPLE_TYPE keywords in the label.  For DTM
data, each sample is a 16-bit signed integer. The LINE_SAMPLES
keyword describes the number of elements in each image line.



10 -  SOFTWARE 

10.1 - SOFTWARE DISCLAIMER

Although the software contained on the MDIM CDROMs have been used
and tested, no warranty, expressed or implied, is made by NASA, the
Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), or the United States Geological
Survey (USGS) as to the accuracy and functioning of the software
and related materials, and no responsibility is assumed by NASA,
JPL, or the USGS.

10.2 - SOFTWARE TOOLS

Software is provided on the MDIM CDROMs to facilitate access to the
image files. These files allow simple display capability of the
individual image tiles. Software is provided for four hardware
platforms: Apple Macintosh, IBM/PC, SUN Sparcstation, and VAX/VMS
workstation systems. The software is located in subdirectories
within the SOFTWARE directory. The subdirectories MAC (Macintosh
software), PC (IBM/PC software), SUN (SUN Sparcstation), and VAX
(VAX/VMS workstation) will be found. Within each subdirectory is
located a file called SOFTINFO.TXT which describes how to use the
software.


11 - IMAGE INDEX

Each CDROM in the MDIM volume sets 1-6 contains an image index file
(IMGINDEX.TAB) with catalog information about all MDIM image files in
the collection. The image index file and it's associated PDS label file
(IMGINDEX.LAB) are located in the INDEX directory. A description of
this table can be found in the VOLINFO.TXT file on volumes 1 - 6.

For volume 7, the image index is named DTMINDEX.TAB with the associated
PDS label DTMINDEX.LAB.  The format of the DTMINDEX was modified slightly
to accommodate the expanded number of source images that make up the MDIM
data products on volumes 7.

Table 5 describes the contents of the image index file located in the
INDEX directory on volumes 7.  All fields are in ASCII character
format.  The image index files are formatted to allow automatic data
entry programs to access the data for entry into an existing data base
system.  The non-numeric fields are enclosed by double-quote characters. 
All fields are delimited by commas.  The last two bytes in a record are
carriage-control and line-feed characters. Table 5 gives the starting
and ending byte positions of each field in the image index.  These byte
positions specify the actual fields and do not include the double-quote
marks and commas that separate the fields.


          TABLE 5 - FORMAT OF IMAGE INDEX FILE VOLUME 7 ONLY
          --------------------------------------------------
 Byte Positions                   Description
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------- 


   2 -  23   FILE_NAME: the fully qualified CDROM file name for the 
               image file. The format of the directory name 
               specification is the VAX/VMS directory format, with 
	       brackets indicating the directory hierarchy. Users on 
               other systems will need to convert the directory names 
               to the operating system formats.
     
  26 -  35   MAXIMUM_LATITUDE: the Maximum latitude in the image file. 
               Latitude ranges from +90.0 degrees for the north pole 
               to -90.0 degrees for the south pole.

  37 -  46   MINIMUM_LATITUDE: the minimum latitude in the image file.

  48 -  58   MAXIMUM_LONGITUDE: the maximum longitude in the image 
               file. 
               Longitude ranges from +180.0 to -180 degrees.

  60 -  70   MINIMUM_LONGITUDE: the minimum longitude in the image 
               file.

  72 -  82   CENTER_LONGITUDE: the center longitude of the Sinusoidal
               Equal-Area projection.

  84 -  88   LINES: the number of lines in the image file. This 
               parameter specifies the number of elements of the 
               slowest varying dimension of the two dimensional image 
               array.

  90 -  94   LINE_SAMPLES: the number of samples in the image file. 
               This parameter specifies the number of elements of the 
               fastest varying dimension of the two dimensional image 
	       array.

  96 -  99   MAP_RESOLUTION: the map resolution of the image file 
	       expressed as number of pixels per degree at the equator.

 102 - 108   VOLUME_ID : CDROM volume ID containing image file

 111 - 121   X_AXIS_PROJECTION_OFFSET: the line position of line 1.0 
               and sample 1.0 in the x,y coordinates relative to the
               origin of the map projection.

 123 - 133   Y_AXIS_PROJECTION_OFFSET: the sample position of line 1.0, 
               sample 1.0 in the x,y coordinates relative to the
               origin of the map projection.

 136 - 211   NOTE: contains a brief description of the image file. The 
               field indicates the number of degrees/pixel of the file
               and specifies the center latitude and longitude
               coordinate of the image file.
          
 215 - 222   IMAGE_ID: this field contains a six-character string to 
               identify the image file. The field matches the name 
               of the input file.

 255 - 265   MAP_SCALE: this field gives the number of kilometers per
                pixel at the equator.
   
 238 - 243   SOURCE_IMAGE_ID  1: List of up to 64 source images. List
 247 - 252   SOURCE_IMAGE_ID  2: contains the image identifiers of the 
 256 - 261   SOURCE_IMAGE_ID  3: Viking Orbiter images used to
 265 - 270   SOURCE_IMAGE_ID  4: create the MDIM image file. Blanks
 274 - 279   SOURCE_IMAGE_ID  5: indicate no SOURCE_IMAGE_ID. There are
 283 - 288   SOURCE_IMAGE_ID  6: never more than 64 images that make up
 292 - 297   SOURCE_IMAGE_ID  7: an MDIM image file on volume 7.
 etc.

12 - GAZETTEER

Planetary nomenclature, like terrestrial nomenclature, is used to
uniquely identify a feature on the surface of a planet or satellite
so that the feature can be easily located, described, or discussed.
The gazetteer on the MDIM CDROM volume set contains detailed
information about all named features on Mars that the International
Astronomical Union (IAU) has named and approved from its founding
in 1919 through its triennial meeting in 1991. 
The gazetteer is located on each CDROM volume of the seven volume
set.  The information pertinent to the gazetteer is located in the
GAZETTER directory (a letter 'E' has been intentionally dropped
from the spelling of gazetteer because of the eight character limit
on file names on IBM/PC systems).  In this directory, a detailed
documentation of the gazetteer can be found in the GAZETTER.TXT
file. The file GAZETTER.TAB is the gazetteer table. Each row in the
table contains the description of a single Martian feature.
Finally, the GAZETTER.LBL file is the PDS detached label that
describes the file contents and format.

Ancillary files exist in the GAZETTER directory for users of the
Word Perfect  text editor. The diacritical marks located in the
gazetteer can be converted to the Work Perfect format with the
macros included in this directory. Files which end in the extension
*.WPM contain the WordPerfect Macros. The document file WPMACRO.TXT
describes the use of these macros.

13 -    VIKING VIEWING GEOMETRY (SPICE)

The table files located in the GEOMETRY directory contain information 
describing the primary viewing geometry elements of the Viking EDR
frames that make up the Mars DTM and MDIM image files. They were derived
photogrammetrically as a by-product of DTM and MDIM compilation, and
supercede data originally provided by the Mission Test and Imaging
System (MTIS) during active flight operations. All geometry elements are
in the EME1950 coordinate system, the coordinate system originally used
by the Viking Project. Each row (record) in the table corresponds to an
EDR image, the columns (fields) in each row give the primary geometry
elements as four vectors: Camera-Angles (declination, right-ascension,
twist), Planet-Angles (declination, right-ascension, and spin),
Spacecraft Vector, and Sun Vector.  Each record consists of 196 bytes,
with a carriage return/line feed sequence in bytes 195 and 196. All
fields (columns) are separated by commas, and character and time fields
are enclosed in double quotation marks. This format allows the table to
be treated as a fixed-length record file on hosts that support this file
type and as a normal text file on other hosts. The table file
DTMGEOM.TAB gives the EDR images used in the DTM compilation,
MDIMGEOM.TAB gives the EDR images uses in the MDIM compilation. The
format of the tables are given in table 6.

The data in the geometry files can be used to generate geometric and
viewing information about an image. Using the geometry data along with
software in the NAIF SPIECLIB TOOLKIT [24], or the similar software in
PICS SPICELIB and MAPLIB libraries [18], many items useful in processing
and analysis of an Viking EDR image data can be calculated. The
following are some examples: sub-spacecraft latitude and longitude;
sub-solar latitude and longitude; image resolution; latitude and
longitude of image center; sun phase angle; emission angle; azimuth of
the sun; azimuth to the spacecraft; latitude and longitude range of an
image; and the line and sample in an image as a function of latitude and
longitude, or vice versa.


                  TABLE 6. - FORMAT OF GEOMETRY FILES
                  -----------------------------------

  Byte Positions                   Description
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------
   2 -  7  IMAGE_ID: this field is a six-character string to identify a 
           Viking Orbiter image.  The first three characters represent
           the orbit number. The fourth character is either an A for 
           Viking Orbiter 1, a B for Viking Orbiter 2, or an S for the 
           Viking Orbiter 1 Survey Mission.  The letters C and D is 
           used for images acquired by Viking Orbiter 1 and 2, 
           respectively, before orbit insertion.  The letter X is used
           for Viking Orbiter 1 images when more than 100 images were 
           taken in one orbit.  The last two characters represent the 
           sequence number of the image within that orbit.

  10 - 19  IMAGE_NUMBER: The image number is a value derived from the 
           spacecraft clock start count.  It is also known as the
           FSC (frame start count), and is a commonly used identifier 
           for a Viking Orbiter image.

  21 - 32  Camera angle - declination in (degrees) EME1950
           of the pointing direction of the optical axis of the 
           camera.

  34 - 44  Camera angle - right ascension in (degrees) EME1950
           of the pointing direction of the optical axis of the
           camera.

  46 - 56  Camera angle - twist in (degrees) EME1950 is the
           picture rotation angle about line of boresight.

  58 - 65  Spacecraft to target X-component vector EME1950

  67 - 74  Spacecraft to target Y-component vector EME1950

  76 - 83  Spacecraft to target Z-component vector EME1950

  85 - 93  Planet angles - declination (degrees) EME1950

  95 -103  Planet angles - right ascension (degrees) EME1950

 105 -113  Planet angles - spin EME1950

 115 -126  Sun to target X-component vector (EME1950)

 128 -139  Sun to target Y-component vector (EME1950)

 141 -152  Sun to target Z-component vector (EME1950)

 154 -168  Julian day when the image was acquired.

 171 -193  The time when the image was acquired, in the format 
           yyyy-mm-ddThh:mm:ss.ssZ.  'yyyy' = year, 'mm' = month,
           'dd' = day of month, 'hh' = hour, 'mm' = minute, 
           'ss.ss' = seconds. The time system is Universal Time (UTC).


14 -   ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The National Aeronautics and Space Administration is charged with the
responsibility for coordination of a program of systematic exploration
of the planets by U.S. spacecraft.  To this end, it finances spaceflight
missions and data analysis and research programs administered and
performed by numerous institutions.  The Geological Survey of the U.S.
Department of the Interior is the agency that performs most of the
mapping in support of NASA's program of planetary exploration and
scientific research.

The digital Mars maps contained in these volumes were compiled by the
U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) under funding provided by NASA through its
Geology and Geophysics Program at NASA headquarters, Washington, DC, and
through the Mars Observer Project administered by the Jet Propulsion
Laboratory, Pasadena, California.  NASA's Planetary Data System provided
the guidance and standards required to manufacture and distribute the
optical disks containing this MDIM and DTM of Mars.

Compilation of the Mars digital models was performed at USGS under the
direction of R.M. Batson, L.A. Soderblom, and Sherman S.C. Wu, Principal
Investigator and Co-Investigators, respectively.  Wu provided the
technical management and supervision of a team of photogrammetrists who
compiled the topographic control and the topographic maps, and created
the DTM.  Kathleen Edwards provided the technical management and
supervision of a team of technicians who compiled the MDIM.  The design,
layout, and production of the CDROMs were performed by E.M. Eliason, A.
Allison, and A. Manley at the USGS, and M. Martin and J. Hyon at JPL.

15 -  REFERENCES

1.  Snyder, C. W., 1977. The Missions of the Viking Orbiters, J.  
         Geophys. Res., 82, p. 3971-3983.

2.  Snyder, C. W., 1979. The Extended Mission of Viking, J.
     Geophys. Res., 84, p. 7917-7933.

3.  Benesh, M., and T. Thorpe, 1976. Viking Orbiter 1975 visual  
     imaging subsystem calibration report, JPL Document 611-125,
     Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, Ca.

4.  Klaasen, K. P., T. E. Thorpe, and L. A. Morabito, 1977.
     Inflight performance of the Viking visual imaging subsystem,
     Applied Optics, 16, p. 3158-3170.

5.  Wellman, J. B., F. P. Landauer, D. D. Norris, and T. E. Thorpe,
     The Viking Orbiter visual imaging subsystem, J. Spacecr. 
     Rockets, 13, p. 660-666, 1976.

6. Wu, S.S.C., Elassal, A.A., Jordan, Raymond, and Schafer, F.J.,
     1982, Photogrammetric applications of Viking orbital
     photography:  Planetary and Space Science, v. 30, no. 1, p.
     45-55.

7. Wu, S.S.C., and Doyle, F.J., 1990, Topographic mapping, in
     Greeley, Ronald, and Batson, R.M., eds, Planetary Mapping: New
     York, Cambridge University Press, p. 169-207.
 
8. Wu, S.S.C., and Schafer, F.J., 1984, Mars control network: 
     American Society of Photogrammetry, in Technical papers of the 
     50th annual meeting of the American Society of Photogrammetry, 
     vol. 2, Washington, D.C., March 11 - 16, 1984, p. 456-463.

9. Batson, R.M., 1987, Digital cartography of the planets: new   
     methods, its status, and its future:  Photogrammetric Engineering
     and Remote Sensing, vol. 53, no. 9, p. 1211-1218.

10. Batson, R.M., 1990, Cartography, in Greeley, Ronald, and 
     Batson, R.M., eds, Planetary Mapping: New York, Cambridge
     University Press, p. 60-95.

11. Batson, R.M., 1990, Appendix I: Map formats and projections
     used in planetary cartography, in Greeley, Ronald, and Batson,
     R.M., eds, Planetary Mapping: New York, Cambridge University
     Press, p. 261-276.

12. Batson, R.M., 1990, Appendix III: Digital planetary
     cartography, in Greeley, Ronald, and Batson, R.M., eds, Planetary
     Mapping: New York, Cambridge University Press, p. 289-287.

13. Clark, David, 1923. Plane and geodetic surveying for
     engineers,  vol. 2, higher surveying [5th Ed., 1963, Revised by
     Clendinning, James]. Constable & Co. Ltd., London, p. 599-600.

14. Johnson, T.V., L.A. Soderblom, J.A. Mosher, G.E. Danielson,
     A.F. Cook, and P. Kupferman, 1983. Global multispectral mosaics
     of the icy Galilean satellites.  Journal of Geophysical Research,
     vol. 88, no. B-7, p. 5789-5805.  15. Kieffer, H.H., P.A. Davis,
     and L.A. Soderblom, 1981. Mars' global properties: Maps and
     applications. Proceedings of Lunar and Planetary Science
     Conference XII, Houston, Texas, March 16-20, 1981, p. 1395-1417.

15. Pettengill, Gordon H., Donald B. Campbell, and Harold
     Masursky, 1980.  The surface of Venus.  Scientific American, vol.
     243,  no. 2, p. 54-65.

16. Soderblom, L.A., Kathleen Edwards, E.M. Eliason, E.M.
     Sanchez, and M.P. Charette, 1978. Global color variations on the
     Martian surface. Icarus, vol. 34, p. 446-464.

17. Planetary Cartography Working Group, 1984.  Planetary
     cartography in the next decade (1984-1994).  National Aeronautics
     and Space Administration Special Publication 475, 71 p.

18. Planetary Image Cartography System (PICS), Unpublished
     Manual,  Branch of Astrogeology, U. S. Geological Survey,
     Flagstaff, Az., 1987.  PICS is an integrated computerized system
     for the systematic reduction, display, mapping, and analysis of
     planetary image data.

19. Wu, S.S.C., 1981. A Method of Defining Topographic Datums of 
     Planetary Bodies, Annales de Geophysique, Center National
     de la Recherche Scientifique, Numero 1, Tome 37,  p. 147-160

20. Davis, R. L., June 1990. Specification for the Object
     Description Language, Version 2.0; Available from the PDS, Jet
     Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, Ca.

21. Cribbs, M., and Wagner, D., May, 1991. Planetary Data System
     Data Preparation Workbook; vols. 1 and 2, JPL Document 7669, Jet
     Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, Ca.

22. VAX integers, as storage units in data files, are configured
     in  "least significant byte first" order.  This is the order for
     integer values used by VAX and IBM PC computer systems.  Users 
     of other computer architectures (IBM Mainframes, Macintosh,  SUN,
     and Apollo) may need to swap the high and low byte  positions for
     16-bit integer data.  For 32-bit integer data,  swap byte pairs 1
     and 4, and 2 and 3. For example, hexadecimal  value AA BB CC DD
     becomes DD CC BB AA.

23. Information processing -- Volume and file structure of CDROM 
     for information interchange, ISO/DIS document number 9660, 
     International Organization for Standardization, 1 Rue de 
     Varembe, Case Postale 56, CH-1121 Geneva 20, Switzerland,  1987.

24. NAIF SPICE TOOLKIT: A software package for spacecraft navigation,
     viewing geometry, and planetary ephemerides. Contact: Chuck Acton,
     Mail Stop 301-125L, Jet Propulsion Laboratory, 4800 Oak Grove Drive,
     Pasadena, CA 91109; Tel. (818)354-3869; Span: NAIF::CHA, 
     e-mail: cha@naif.jpl.nasa.gov.


            APPENDIX A - ISO VOLUME AND DIRECTORY STANDARD


A.1 - VOLUME AND DIRECTORY STRUCTURES

The volume and directory structure of the CDROM conforms to the
standard specified by the International Organization for
Standardization (ISO) [23].  This standard is known as the ISO-9660
standard.  This CDROM disk conforms to the first level of interchange,
level-1.


A.2 - FILE STRUCTURE

The files on this CDROM are of two types:  fixed-length record files,
and stream format files.  The characteristics of each record type are
described in the following sections.


A.2.1 - FIXED LENGTH RECORDS

Records in a file with fixed-length records are all the same length,
and there is no embedded information to indicate the beginning or end
of a record.  Fixed-length records allow any part of a file to be
accessed directly without the need to pass through the file
sequentially.  Image files with the file name extension '.IMG' and
table files with the file name extension '.TAB' are fixed-length record
files. The starting byte of any record can be calculated as follows:

           offset = (record-1)*length

    where: offset = offset byte position of record from start of file
           record = desired record to access
           length = length of record in bytes


A.2.3 - STREAM FILES

Stream files typically are used to store ASCII text such as
documentation and program source code.  A stream file may have records
of varying lengths.  The end of a record is marked by two bytes
containing the ASCII carriage return and line feed characters (hex 0D
and 0A).  Stream files are different from variable-length record files,
which store the record size in the first two bytes of each record.

On this CDROM, the documentation files, detached label files, and
software source code files are in stream format.  They may be printed
or displayed on a terminal.  Their file names have the extensions
'.TXT','.LBL', '.C', or '.FOR'.  

A.2.4 - EXTENDED ATTRIBUTE RECORD

An extended attribute record (XAR) contains information about a file's
record format, record attributes, and record length.  The extended
attribute record is not considered part of the file and is not seen by
programs accessing a file with high-level I/O routines.  Not all
computer operating systems support extended attribute records.  Those
that do not will simply bypass the XAR when accessing a file.



     APPENDIX B - SYNTACTIC RULES OF KEYWORD ASSIGNMENT STATEMENTS



The label area of the image files use the syntactic rules of the Object
Definition Language (ODL) adopted by the PDS. This appendix provides
only a very brief description of the syntax of the ODL language. For a
complete description of the ODL language see Davis [20], and the
Planetary Data System Data Preparation Workbook - Volume 1 [21].

A keyword assignment statement, made up of a string of ASCII
characters, contains the name of an attribute and the value of that
attribute.  A keyword assignment statement has the general form shown
below:

         name  = value  [/* comment */]

The format of each keyword assignment statement is essentially
free-form; blanks and tabs are typically ignored by a parsing  routine. 
An attribute name is separated from its value by the equal symbol (=).
Each keyword assignment statement may optionally be followed by a 
comment that more completely describes the entry. The comment begins
with a slash character followed by an asterisk character (/*), and
terminates with an asterisk character followed by a slash character
(*/). Comments may also exist on a line without a keyword assignment
statement. Note that the brackets indicate that the comment and its
delimiter are optional. The MDIM labels have carriage-return and
line-feed characters following the "name = value" sequence. The ODL
language does not require a cr/lf sequence at the end of each keyword
assignment statement but are optional in order to facilitate printing
of keywords.

Values associated with an attribute can be integers, real numbers,
unitized  real numbers, literals, times, or text strings.



B.1 - INTEGER NUMBERS

An integer value consists of a string of digits preceded optionally by
a sign (+ or -). Non-decimal based integers are expressed according to
the Ada language convention: b#nnnnnnn#, where 'b' represents the base
of the number, and '#' delimits the number 'nnnnnnnn'. For example, the
number expressed as 2#111# represents the binary number 111, which is 7
in base 10.



B.2 - REAL NUMBERS

A real number has the form: [s]f.d[En] where:

     s = optional sign (+ or -)
     f = one or more digits specify the integral portion of the number.
     d = one or more digits specify the fraction portion of the number.
     n = an optional exponent expressed as a power of 10.

A unitized real number is a real number with an associated unit of
measurement.  The units for a real number value are enclosed in angle
brackets (< >).  For example, 1.234 <SECONDS> indicates a value of
1.234 seconds.




B.3 - DATES AND TIMES

A special form of a numeric field is a time value. The following format
of date/time representations is used:

         yyyy-mm-ddThh:mm:ss.fffZ
where:   yyyy    = year
         mm      = month
         dd      = day of month
         hh      = hour
         mm      = minute
         ss      = seconds
         fff     = fraction of a second
         Z       = The Z qualifier indicates the time is expressed
                   as Universal Time Corrected (UTC).


B.4 - LITERAL VALUES

A literal value is an alphanumeric string that is a member of a set of
finite values.  It can also contain underscore character (_).  A
literal value must be delimited by double or single quote characters ("
or ') if it does not begin with a letter (A-Z).  If the literal begins
with a letter, it does not have to be enclosed in single quotes.  If a
literal appears within quotes, the literal may contain any printable
ASCII character.  For example, the literal value "1:1" is legal as long
as the single or double quoted format is used.  A keyword assignment
statement using a literal value might look like the examples shown
below:

         DATA_SET_ID = "VO1/VO2-M-VIS-5-DIM-V1.0"
         TARGET_NAME = MARS

B.5 - TEXT CHARACTER STRINGS

Text strings can be any length and can consist of any sequence of
printable ASCII characters including tabs, blanks, carriage-control, or
line-feed characters.  Text strings are enclosed in double quote
characters.  If the text string comprises several lines, it continues
until a double quote character is encountered and includes the
carriage-control and line-feed characters.




       APPENDIX C - KEYWORD ASSIGNMENTS FOR MDIM AND DTM IMAGES


CCSD3ZF0000100000001NJPL3IF0PDS200000001 = SFDU_LABEL
    This keyword provides a mechanism for image files on this CDROM to
    conform to the SFDU (Standard Formatted Data Unit) convention. The
    first 20 bytes identify the file as a CCSDS SFDU entity. The next
    20 bytes identify the file as a registered product of the JPL SFDU
    control authority. The components of both SFDU labels are the
    control authority identifier (characters 1-4), the version
    identifier (character 5), the class identifier (character 6), a
    spare field (characters 7-8), a format identifier  (characters
    9-12), and a length field indicator (characters 13-20). The version
    identifier indicates a "Version-3" label, which allows files to be
    delimited by an end-of-file marker, rather than requiring a byte
    count to be embedded in the label. The keyword conforms to standard
    PDS keyword syntax and the value associated with this keyword will
    always be SFDU_LABEL.


RECORD_TYPE          = FIXED_LENGTH
    This keyword defines the record structure of the file. The MDIM
    image files are always fixed-length record files. This keyword 
    always contains the value FIXED_LENGTH.


RECORD_BYTES         = xxxx
    Record length in bytes for fixed length records.  


FILE_RECORDS         = xxxx
    Total number of records contained in the file.


LABEL_RECORDS        = xxxx
    Number of records in the label area of the image file.


^IMAGE_HISTOGRAM     = xx
    The (^) character prefixing a keyword indicates that the keyword is
    a pointer to the starting record of a data object in the file.  In
    this case, the keyword is the pointer to the Image Histogram Object.
    The keyword value indicates the starting record in the file for the
    Image Histogram Object.  The number of records found in an object is
    determined by differencing the value of the pointer keyword from the
    value of the next pointer. DTM files do not contain an
    IMAGE_HISTOGRAM object.


^IMAGE               =  xx
    The keyword value points to the starting fixed-length record in
    the file for the Image Object.


DATA_SET_ID          = "VO1/VO2-M-VIS-5-DIM-V1.0"
    The PDS defined data set identifier for the MDIM image data 
    products produced from the Viking Orbiter Imaging System.


SPACECRAFT_NAME      = {VIKING_ORBITER_1, VIKING_ORBITER_2}
    The spacecraft name identifies the spacecrafts that acquired the
    image data. For the MDIM images, this keyword always contains the
    values VIKING_ORBITER_1 and VIKING_ORBITER_2 to indicate that
    images that make up the mosaics are a composite of data acquired
    from these two spacecraft.


TARGET_NAME          = MARS
    Observation target of the image. This value is always MARS for the
    MDIM digital image products.

IMAGE_ID             = vwxxyzzz
    This is the unique image identification code for the MDIM image. The
    IMAGE_ID is the same as the name given to the file.

                v   =  Type of image file
                        M - Mars Digital Image Map
                        T - Mars Digital Topographic Model
                        S - Shaded Relief Airbrush Map
                w   =  Resolution code for image file
                        C  - 1/4   degrees/pixel
                        E  - 1/16  degrees/pixel
                        G  - 1/64  degrees/pixel
                        I  - 1/256 degrees/pixel
                xx  =  Central latitude value rounded
                       down to nearest whole latitude
                y   =  North or South latitude
                        N - North latitude
                        S - South latitude
                zzz =  Central longitude value rounded 
                       down to nearest whole longitude
    

SOURCE_IMAGE_ID      = {"316A27","427A33"}

     The MDIM images are a mosaic of Viking Orbiter images. This keyword
     lists the IMAGE_ID's of those Viking Orbiter images that were 
     used in the mosaic for this image. This keyword is a set of
     literal values.


INSTRUMENT_NAME      = {VISUAL_IMAGING_SUBSYSTEM_CAMERA_A, 
                        VISUAL_IMAGING_SUBSYSTEM_CAMERA_B}
    The name of the cameras used to acquire the image. This keyword
    will always contain the values VISUAL_IMAGING_SUBSYSTEM_CAMERA_A
    and _B. 

NOTE                 = "description"
    This field provides the product name, scale, and latitude and 
    longitude of the center of the image.

OBJECT                 = IMAGE_HISTOGRAM
  ITEMS                = 256
  ITEM_TYPE            = VAX_INTEGER
  ITEM_BITS            = 32
END_OBJECT             = IMAGE_HISTOGRAM
    This keyword sequence identifies the Image Histogram Object.  The
    object contains 256 elements, stored in VAX integer format [22].
    Each element has 32 bits.  The records associated with an object are
    concatenated together to make the object.  Some objects do not
    completely fill the records that make up the object.


OBJECT                 = IMAGE
  LINES                = xxxx
  LINE_SAMPLES         = xxxx
  SAMPLE_TYPE          = UNSIGNED_INTEGER
  SAMPLE_BITS          = 8
  SAMPLE_BIT_MASK      = 2#11111111#
  CHECKSUM             = xxxxxxxxx
  MINIMUM              = xxxx
  MAXIMUM              = xxxx
  SCALING_FACTOR       = 2.0
  OFFSET               = -6000.0
END_OBJECT             = IMAGE
    This keyword sequence describes the image object. The meaning of
    the keywords with this sequence area as follows:
       LINES = xxxx
           Number of image lines in the image object.  
       LINE_SAMPLES  = xxxx
           Number of samples in each image line.  
       SAMPLE_TYPE = UNSIGNED_INTEGER
           Data type for pixels values, should always be unsigned
           integers. For DTM images the value is SIGNED_INTEGER
       SAMPLE_BITS = 8
           Number of bits in a pixel, which are 8-bit values in the
           range 0 to 255. For DTM images the value is 16 
       SAMPLE_BIT_MASK  = 2#11111111#
           Active bits in an image sample.  The number is expressed as a
           base 2 value in the Ada language number base convention.  The
           keyword value consists of a string of 1's or 0's.  The value
           1 indicates a bit is active and a 0 indicates a bit is not in
           use.  For example, SAMPLE_BIT_MASK = 2#11111111# indicates
           all bits active.
       CHECKSUM = xxxxxxxxxx
           The sum of all the pixel values within the image. This
           parameter can be used to verify the reading of an image file.
       MINIMUM = xxxx
           The minimum DN value in an image file (DTM files only)
       MAXIMUM = xxxx
           The maximum DN value in an image file (DTM files only)
       SCALING_FACTOR = 2.0
       OFFSET         = -6000
           Scaling used to convert from DN to elevation
           ELEVATION(METERS) = DN*SCALING_FACTOR + OFFSET


OBJECT                 = IMAGE_MAP_PROJECTION_CATALOG
  ^DATA_SET_MAP_PROJECTION_CATALOG = "DSMAPDIM.LBL"
  MAP_PROJECTION_TYPE  = SINUSOIDAL
  MAP_RESOLUTION       = x<PIXEL/DEG>
  MAP_SCALE            = x.xxxxx<KM/PIXEL>
  MAXIMUM_LATITUDE     = x.xxxxx
  MINIMUM_LATITUDE     = x.xxxxx
  MAXIMUM_LONGITUDE    = x.xxxxx
  MINIMUM_LONGITUDE    = x.xxxxx
  X_AXIS_PROJECTION_OFFSET = x.xxxxx
  Y_AXIS_PROJECTION_OFFSET = x.xxxxx
  A_AXIS_RADIUS        = 3393.40
  B_AXIS_RADIUS        = 3393.40
  C_AXIS_RADIUS        = 3375.73
  FIRST_STANDARD_PARALLEL = "N/A"
  SECOND_STANDARD_PARALLEL = "N/A"
  POSITIVE_LONGITUDE_DIRECTION = WEST
  CENTER_LATITUDE      = 0.00000
  CENTER_LONGITUDE     = x.xxxxx
  REFERENCE_LATITUDE   = "N/A"
  REFERENCE_LONGITUDE  = "N/A"
  X_AXIS_FIRST_PIXEL   = 1
  Y_AXIS_FIRST_PIXEL   = 1
  X_AXIS_LAST_PIXEL    = xxxx
  Y_AXIS_LAST_PIXEL    = xxxx
  MAP_PROJECTION_ROTATION = "N/A"
END_OBJECT             = IMAGE_MAP_PROJECTION_CATALOG
    This keyword sequence describes the cartographic keywords that 
    define the mapping parameters of the image.
       ^DATA_SET_MAP_PROJECTION_CATALOG = "DSMAPDIM.LBL"
           This keyword points to a separate file (DSMAPDIM.LBL) on
           the CDROM that contains supplemental and nonessential
           keyword descriptors for map projection parameters. By
           convention, supplemental labels are found in the LABEL
           directory.
       MAP_PROJECTION_TYPE  = SINUSOIDAL
           This element identifies the type of projection used in the
            map. This value is always SINUSOIDAL for the MDIM products
            and signifies a Sinusoidal Equal-Area projection.
       MAP_RESOLUTION       = x<PIXEL/DEG>
           This element identifies the scale of the MDIM image file. The
           resolution is defined in pixels per degree.
       MAP_SCALE            = x.xxxxx<KM/PIXEL>
           This element identifies the scale of the MDIM image file
           and is defined in kilometers per pixel.
       MAXIMUM_LATITUDE     = x.xxxxx
           This element specifies the northern most latitude in the MDIM
           image file.
       MINIMUM_LATITUDE     = x.xxxxx
           This element specifies the southern most latitude in the MDIM
           image file.
       MAXIMUM_LONGITUDE    = x.xxxxx
           This element specifies the left-most longitude of the image
           file.
       MINIMUM_LONGITUDE    = x.xxxxx
           This element specifies the right-most longitude of the image
           file.
       X_AXIS_PROJECTION_OFFSET = x.xxxxx
           This element provides the line offset value of the map
           projection origin position from line and sample 1,1. Note
           that the positive direction is to the right and down. See
           Appendix E for the use of this element.
       Y_AXIS_PROJECTION_OFFSET = x.xxxxx
           This element provides the sample offset value of the map
           projection origin position from line and sample 1,1. Note
           that the positive direction is to the right and down. See
           Appendix E for the use of this element. 
       A_AXIS_RADIUS        = 3393.40
       B_AXIS_RADIUS        = 3393.40
       C_AXIS_RADIUS        = 3375.73
           These elements provide the semi-major axis (A), intermediate
           axis (B), and semi-minor axis of the ellipsoid that defines
           the shape of the body defined in kilometers. These values
           are always 3393.40, 3393.40, and 3375.73 respectively.
       FIRST_STANDARD_PARALLEL = "N/A"
           This element is a mapping transformation parameter. The
           Sinusoidal Equal-Area projection does not used this element.
       SECOND_STANDARD_PARALLEL = "N/A"
           This element is a mapping transformation parameter. The
           Sinusoidal Equal-Area projection does not used this element.
       POSITIVE_LONGITUDE_DIRECTION = WEST
           This element identifies the direction of longitude
           (EAST,WEST) for a planet. The IAU definition for direction
           of positive longitude is adopted. For MARS this direction
           is WEST.        
       CENTER_LATITUDE      = 0.00000
           This element identifies the center latitude of the
            projection. For Sinusoidal Equal-Area projections, this
            value is zero.
       CENTER_LONGITUDE     = x.xxxxx
           This element identifies the center longitude of the
           projection. Each MDIM image file has its own center
           longitude. See Appendix E for the use of this mapping
           parameter.
       REFERENCE_LATITUDE   = "N/A"
           This element is a mapping transformation parameter. The
           Sinusoidal Equal-Area projection does not used this element.
       REFERENCE_LONGITUDE  = "N/A"
           This element is a mapping transformation parameter. The
           Sinusoidal Equal-Area projection does not used this element.
       X_AXIS_FIRST_PIXEL   = 1
           This element provides the x-dimension index to be assigned
           the first pixel that was physically recorded at the
           beginning of the image array. This value always 1 for MDIM
           image files.
       Y_AXIS_FIRST_PIXEL   = 1
           This element provides the y-dimension index to be assigned
           the first pixel that was physically recorded at the
           beginning of the image array. This value always 1 for MDIM
           image files.
       X_AXIS_LAST_PIXEL    = xxxx
           This element provides the x-dimension index to be assigned
           the last pixel that was physically recorded at the end of
           the image array. For MDIM image files, this element equals
           the number of lines in the image.
       Y_AXIS_LAST_PIXEL    = xxxx
           This element provides the y-dimension index to be assigned
           the last pixel that is physically recorded at the end of
           the image array. For MDIM image files, this element equals
           the number of samples in the image.
       MAP_PROJECTION_ROTATION = "N/A"
           This element is a mapping transformation parameter. The
           Sinusoidal Equal-Area projection does not used this element.
   
END
    The keyword entries with a line that contains only the word
    END. Bytes in the label area after the END statement are ignored. 




             APPENDIX D - GEOMETRIC DEFINITION OF A PIXEL




The purpose here is to describe the spatial or geometric definition of
a pixel used in the generation and utilization of the MDIM digital
image products. A broad range of factors enters into this question. For
example, is a pixel to be conceived of as a point or as an area? The
point definition would be most convenient, for instance, when dealing
with coordinate grid overlays. This results in an odd number of pixels
across a map that has an even number of spatial increments.  For
changing scales (for instance by even powers of 2) this definition
becomes a problem. In this case it makes more sense to treat a pixel as
a finite area.  Then an even number of pixels covers an even number of
spatial increments and decreasing/increasing scales by a power of 2
becomes trivial. However, grids now fall between pixels, at least in a
mathematical sense. Their treatment in the generation of hardcopy
therefore becomes an issue.

It was decided that the area concept of a pixel was the better choice;
we would have to live with the asymmetries introduced in things like
cartographic grids. There are various solutions: (1) use two pixels for
the width of a grid line, (2) stagger grid pixels back-and-forth across
the mathematical position, (3) use a convention whereby grid lines are
systematically drawn offset from their mathematical position.

The next issue is the conversion between integer coordinates and real
coordinates of the pixel mesh. We adopt the convention that pixels are
numbered (or named if you like) beginning in the upper left corner with
line 1, sample 1 (pixel 1,1); lines increase downward; samples increase
to the right. (Even this is not a universal standard; some astronomical
systems begin, perhaps more logically, in the lower left corner.) There
are three reasonable possibilities for aligning a real, or floating
point, coordinate system with the pixel mesh: the coordinate 1.0, 1.0
could be the upper left, the center, or the lower right of pixel 1,1.
The convention historically used for geometric calibration files
(reseau positions) and also used in the Multimission Image Processing
Laboratory at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, is that the center of the
pixel is defined as its location in real coordinates. In other words,
the real coordinates of the center of pixel 1,1 are 1.0, 1.0. The top
left corner of the pixel is .5, .5 and the bottom right corner is
1.49999...,1.499999. The bottom and right edge of a pixel is the
mathematically open boundary. This is the standard adopted in the MDIM
image products.

Cartographic conventions must also be defined. The map projection
representation of a pixel is mathematically open at the increasing
(right and lower) boundaries, and mathematically closed at its left and
upper boundaries. An exception occurs at the physical limits of the
projection; the lower boundary of the lowest pixel is closed to include
the limit of the projection (e. g. the south pole).  Figure D.1 shows
the coordinates of Pixel 1,1.


              

                 
                 Figure D.1 - Coordinates of Pixel 1,1

                  longitude  180.0         179.00001
                              |               |
                  latitude    |               |   line
                     90.0  -- ----------------- -- .5
                              |               |
                              |               |
                              |               |
                              |               |
                              |       +       |
                              |   (1.0,1.0)   |
                              |               |
                              |               |
                              |               |
                  89.00001 -- ----------------- -- 1.49999
                              |               |
                              |               |
                     sample  .5            1.49999


Finally, we must select a convention for drawing grid lines for various
cartographic coordinates on planetary images and maps. The convention
used for MDIM image products is that a grid line is drawn in the pixels
that contain its floating point value until the open boundary is
reached and then an exception is made so that the outer range of
latitude and longitude will always appear on the image.  This means, in
the example given above, a 10 degree grid would start on pixel 1 and be
drawn on every tenth pixel (11,21,31,...) until the open boundary is
reached.  Then the line would be drawn on the pixel previous to the
open boundary (line 180 instead of line 181, or sample 360 instead of
361).


To summarize, the MDIM conventions are:

1) Pixels are treated as areas, not as points.

2) The integer coordinates begin with 1,1 (read "line 1, sample 1") for
the upper-left-most pixel; lines increase downward; samples increase to
the right.

3) Integer and floating point image coordinates are the same at the
center of a pixel.

4) Grids will be drawn in the pixels that contain the floating point
location of the grid lines except for open boundaries, which will be
drawn to the left or above the open boundary.





           APPENDIX E - SINUSOIDAL EQUAL-AREA PROJECTION EQUATION




MDIM's are presented in a Sinusoidal Equal-area map projection. In this
projection, parallels of latitude are straight lines, with constant
distances between equal latitude intervals. Lines of constant longitude
on either side of the projection meridian are curved since longitude
intervals decrease with the cosine of latitude to account for their
convergence toward the poles. This projection offers a number of
advantages for storing and managing global digital data; in particular,
it is computationally simple, and data are stored in a compact form. 
 
The Sinusoidal Equal-area projection is characterized by a projection
longitude, which is the center meridian of the projection, and a scale,
which is given in units of pixels/degree. The center latitude for all
MDIM's is the equator. Each MDIM file contains its own central
meridian.

The transformation from latitude and longitude to line and sample for
planets with a direction of positive longitude of WEST is given by the
following equations:

  line = INT(X_AXIS_PROJECTION_OFFSET - lat*MAP_RESOLUTION + 1.0)

  sample = INT(Y_AXIS_PROJECTION_OFFSET - (lon - CENTER_LONGITUDE)*
       MAP_RESOLUTION*cos(lat) + 1.0)
                                            
                                       
Note that integral values of line and sample correspond to center of a
pixel. Lat and lon are the latitude and longitude of a given spot on
the surface. 
 
INT is the fortran equivalent floating point to integer function. This
function converts floating point values to integer by truncation of the
fractional part of the floating point value.

X_AXIS_PROJECTION_OFFSET is the line number minus one on which the map
projection origin occurs. The map projection origin is the intersection
of the equator and the projection longitude. The value of
X_AXIS_PROJECTION_OFFSET is positive for images starting north of the
equator and is negative for images starting south of the equator. The
X_AXIS_PROJECTION_OFFSET is found in the labels of each image file.
Y_AXIS_PROJECTION_OFFSET is the nearest sample number to the left of
the projection longitude. The value of Y_AXIS_PROJECTION_OFFSET is
positive for images starting to the west of the projection longitude
and is negative for images starting to the east of the projection
longitude.  The Y_AXIS_PROJECTION_OFFSET is found in the labels of each
image file. 

CENTER_LONGITUDE is the value of the projection longitude, which is the
longitude that passes through the center of the projection. The
CENTER_LONGITUDE is found in the labels of each image file.
                        
MAP_RESOLUTION is the number of pixels per degree on the planet. The
values for MDIM products will be 256, 64, 16, and 4. The MAP_RESOLUTION
is found in the labels of each image file.

There are four PDS parameters that specify the latitude and longitude
boundaries of an image.  MAXIMUM_LATITUDE and MINIMUM_LATITUDE specify
the latitude boundaries of the image, and MAXIMUM_LONGITUDE and
MINIMUM_LONGITUDE specify the longitudinal boundaries of the map.

A special note is required for the MAXIMUM_LONGITUDE and
MINIMUM_LONGITUDE parameters that define the boundaries of an image.
The MAXIMUM_LONGITUDE will be greater than the MINIMUM_LONGITUDE except
when the image map crosses the zero meridian. When the zero meridian is
contained in the image area, then the MINIMUM_LONGITUDE will be greater
than the MAXIMUM_LONGITUDE. When this occurs, it may be convenient for
a computer algorithm that uses these parameters to subtract 360.0
degrees from the MINIMUM_LONGITUDE. For example, if an image had
longitude boundary limits from 10.0 degrees longitude
(MAXIMUM_LONGITUDE) to 350.0 degrees longitude (MINIMUM_LONGITUDE) then
it is implied that the zero meridian is in the middle of the image
file. One could think of the longitude limits of the file going from
10.0 to -10.0 degrees  longitude.

For global maps that cover the entire 360 degrees of a planet, the
MINIMUM_LONGITUDE will equal the MAXIMUM_LONGITUDE indicating that the
"left" edge of the map has the same longitude as the "right" edge of
the map.

